Update quickstart to include dashboards (#6004)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _dashboards/quickstart.md

---
layout: default

> title: OpenSearch Dashboards quickstart

Author: Yes to title case

nav_order: 2
has_children: false
redirect_from:
   - /dashboards/quickstart-dashboards/
---

# OpenSearch Dashboards quickstart

> This quickstart covers the following basics to help you get started with OpenSearch Dashboards:

Author: Thank you for the rewrites. You've tightened the writing and improved readability.

Your OpenSearch Dashboards view can be in either [light or dark mode](#turning-on-and-off-dark-mode), depending on your admin settings. To dock or undock the navigation pane, select the menu icon {::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/icons/menu-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="menu icon"/>{:/} and then **Dock navigation** or **Undock navigation**. A view of the OpenSearch Dashboards homepage is shown in the following image.  

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/opensearch-dashboards-home.png" alt="OpenSearch Dashboards homepage" width="700">

{::nomarkdown}<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/icons/alert-icon.png" class="inline-icon" alt="alert icon"/>{:/} **Note**<br>Before you get started, make sure you've installed OpenSearch and OpenSearch Dashboards. For information about installation and configuration, see [Install and configure OpenSearch]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-opensearch/index/) and [Install and configure OpenSearch Dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/install-and-configure/install-dashboards/index/).
{: .note}

> The following sections include tutorials on using OpenSearch Dashboards applications and tools. You can use your own environment or the [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home#/), which runs on the latest version of OpenSearch. 

Reviewer: By OpenSearch Playground "runs on the latest version of OpenSearch", do we mean the latest numbered version or does Playground run a future version?

Author: The latest numbered version. 
![Uploading Screenshot 2024-02-26 at 10.23.08 AM.png…]()

> The following sections include tutorials on using OpenSearch Dashboards applications and tools. You can use your own environment or the [OpenSearch Playground](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home#/), which runs on the latest version of OpenSearch. 

Author: > I incorporated this content into the introductory sentence, with the exception of "which runs on the latest version of OpenSearch." If this information is critical, let's find a way to provide it elsewhere, perhaps in one of the notes.

@natebower Your changes tighten the wording and improved readability. I accepted them.

## Adding sample data

The [**Sample flight data**](https://playground.opensearch.org/app/home#/tutorial_directory) is used in the tutorials throughout this quickstart.
{: .note}

To add sample data, follow these steps:

1. On the OpenSearch Dashboards **Home** page, choose either **Add sample data**. Alternatively, choose **Add data** from the upper-right toolbar.

> 2. On the **Add sample data** page, choose the datasets you want to add. The following image shows a screenshot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. On the **Add sample data** page, choose the datasets you want to add. The following image shows which sample datasets are available.
```

4. In the DQL search bar, input `FlightDelay:true AND DestCountry: US AND FlightDelayMin >= 60` and then select **Update**. Results for US-bound flights delayed by 60 minutes or more are shown.
5. Filter data by selecting **Add filter** from under the DQL search bar and then selecting a **Field**, **Operator**, and **Value** from the dropdown lists on the **Edit Filter** pop-up window. For example, select `FlightDelayType`, **is**, and **Weather Delay**.

The following image shows the view you see once you have completed the preceding steps.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/opensearch-dashboards-discover.png" alt="Discover output of steps 1 through 6" width="700">

## Using the Dashboards application

With **Dashboards**, you can:

- Display data in a single view.
- Build dynamic dashboards.
- Create and share reports.
- Embed analytics to differentiate your applications.

> The following steps give you a basic overview about using the Dashboard tool:

Reviewer: What does the Dashboard tool do?  

```suggestion
The Dashboard tool creates and stores visualizations related to you data. The following steps give you a basic overview about using the Dashboard tool:
```

> 1. On the OpenSearch Dashboards **Home** page, choose **Dashboards** .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. On the OpenSearch Dashboards **Home** page, choose **Dashboards** . A list of pre-loaded Dashboards related to the sample data appears.
```

4. From the search toolbar in the **Add panels** window, search for the existing panel **[Flights] Delay Buckets** and then select it. A pop-up message confirms that you've added the panel.
5. Select close `x` to exit the **Add panels** window.
6. View the newly added panel, **[Flights] Delay Buckets**, at the end of the dashboard.

The following image shows a view you see once you have completed the preceding steps.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/add-panel2.png" alt="Add panel tutorial screen view" width="700">

For information about using a specific data visualization type, such as VisBuilder, go to [Building data visualizations]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/visualize/viz-index/). For information about using dashboards and visualizations in **Observability**, go to [Observability]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/observing-your-data/).
{: .note}

### Interacting with data using Dashboards

Interactive dashboards allow you to analyze data in more depth and filter it in several ways. With **Dashboards**, you can interact directly with data through the use of dashboard-level filters.

> Take your previous dashboard and follow these steps to further analyze and filter the sample flight data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the **[Flights] Global Flight Dashboard** dashboard and follow these steps to further analyze and filter the sample flight data:
```

2. Choose **Save** to save the customized dashboard.

Another option is to use the dashboard toolbar to apply filters. Follow these steps to learn about this feature:

1. In the dashboard toolbar, choose **Add filter**.
2. From the **Field**, **Operator**, and **Value** dropdown lists, choose **Carrier**, **is**, and **OpenSearch-Air**, respectively, as shown in the following image.
3. Choose **Save**. The dashboard updates automatically.

The following image shows the view you see once you have completed the preceding steps.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//images/<insert image>" alt="Screenshot of Dashboard tutorial panel view" width="700">

## Turning on and off dark mode

Turning on and off dark mode in OpenSearch Dashboards requires administrative access. If you are an administrator, follow these steps:

1. Navigate to **Management** > **Dashboards Management** > **Advanced Settings**.
2. Scroll down to the **Appearance** section and locate the **Dark mode** option.
3. Use the toggle switch to turn on or turn off dark mode for all users of your OpenSearch Dashboards instance.

> 4. Select the **Save changes** button and then the **Reload** button. Changes take effect immediately, so you will see the updated theme right away, similar to the view shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Select the **Save changes** button and then the **Reload** button. The updated theme is applied immediately.
```

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/dark-mode.png" alt="Dark mode view" width="700">

## Next steps

> - **Visualize data.** To learn more about data visualizations in OpenSearch Dashboards, go to [Building data visualizations]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/visualize/viz-index/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Go to [Building data visualizations]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/visualize/viz-index/) to learn more about Dashboards data visualizations.
```

> - **Create dashboards.** To learn more about creating dashboards in OpenSearch Dashboards, go to [Creating dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/quickstart-dashboards/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Go to [Creating dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/quickstart-dashboards/) to learn more about creating dashboards.
```

> - **Gain data insights.** To learn more about your data in OpenSearch Dashboards, go to [Exploring data]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/discover/index-discover/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Go to [Exploring data]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/discover/index-discover/) to learn more about using Dashboards to analyze data. 
```

> - **Gain data insights.** To learn more about your data in OpenSearch Dashboards, go to [Exploring data]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/discover/index-discover/). 

Reviewer 2: I would change the name of the linked page to "Analyzing data" and take a look at our word choices across the Dashboards documentation. We seem to do a lot of "exploring," "discovering," and "unlocking," when it would be better to use a word that reflects what the user will actually _do_.

Author: > I would change the name of the linked page to "Analyzing data" and take a look at our word choices across the Dashboards documentation. We seem to do a lot of "exploring," "discovering," and "unlocking," when it would be better to use a word that reflects what the user will actually _do_.

@natebower I created an issue based on this comment. https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/issues/6531

> - **Ingest data.** To learn more about ingesting data in OpenSearch, go to [Ingest APIs]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/ingest-apis/index/) and [Ingest pipelines]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Go to [Ingest APIs]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/ingest-apis/index/) and [Ingest pipelines]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/) to learn more about data ingestion in OpenSearch.
```

> - **Ingest data.** To learn more about ingesting data in OpenSearch, go to [Ingest APIs]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/ingest-apis/index/) and [Ingest pipelines]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ingest-pipelines/).

Reviewer 2: Do we mean "to learn more about using OpenSearch for data ingestion"?

---
layout: default

> title: Dashboards quickstart

Reviewer 3: do we want to say OpenSearch Dashboards quickstart? Since dashboards is a plugin within OpenSearch Dashboards?

nav_order: 2
has_children: false
redirect_from:
   - /dashboards/quickstart-dashboards/
---

# Dashboards quickstart

This quickstart covers the core concepts that you need to understand to get started with OpenSearch Dashboards. You'll learn how to:

- Add sample data.
- Explore and interact with data.
- Visualize data.

Starting with OpenSearch 2.12, you'll see the following homepage view. This redesign considers the OpenSearch community's feedback about simplifying the dashboard experience. Share your [feedback](<insert-link-feedback-dashboards>) about this update or other tools you want to see in OpenSearch Dashboards.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/dashboards/dashboards-home.png" alt="Screenshot of OpenSearch Dashboards homepage" width="700">

## What's new

Here's what's new with the homepage:

- **Enhanced user experience:** Improves your experience by incorporating intuitive navigation, streamlined workflows, and a visually appealing interface. 
- **Optimized data accessibility:** Presents critical information in a more effective manner, making it easier for you to interpret and analyze data.

> - **Responsive design for multi-platform access:** Prioritizes responsive design principles, ensuring seamless access and functionality across various devices and screen sizes. 

Reviewer 3: will need to vet this. we don't have any visual regression tests for verifying this. could be accurate now but wrong and we wont know it automatically.

Author: @BSFishy Will you review the What's new section to make sure the content is accurate? Thanks!

Reviewer 4: This is accurate. The page extensively uses OUI and properly utilizes the responsive aspects of it, so it should look good on all page sizes. The only disclaimer would be that all within sections are completely owned by plugins, so while the current homepage is responsive, there is not really any guarantee that it is.

Reviewer 5: Given that the new homepage layout will not be default, but rather will be behind a switch, can we adjust the docs accordingly?

Author: @wbeckler Are you asking that we put in some text around the new Discover toggle (Data Explorer) needing to be activated by the user?

Reviewer 5: @BSFishy , can you take a look at this and confirm that the homepage plan for 2.12 (keeping current as default and adding a setting to try out the new one) is consistent with these docs changes?

Reviewer 5: @vagimeli The new homepage has its own separate toggle from the Discover/Data Explorer toggle. I think it defaults to old homepage. I'm also not sure if the PR will make it in for 2.12 as it's still Draft: https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch-Dashboards/pull/5613

Author: @wbeckler We have specific Discover documentation that I can update when it's ready. this quickstart is intended to cover OpenSearch Dashboards tools generally. Is there any specific information we should remove? Currently, the OpenSearch Playground shows the updates, so I think we need to update the quickstart for relevancy.

Author: @kgcreative Will you review the updates at your availability to make sure the UX topics and screenshots are appropriately captured? Thank you.
